have you ever wondered what animals
think and feel let's start with a
question does my dog really love me or
does she just want to treat well it's
easy to see that our dog really loves us
easy to see right what's going on in
that fuzzy little head what is going on
something's going on why is the question
always do they love us why is it always
about us why are we such narcissists I
found a different question to ask
animals who are you
there are capacities of the human mind
that we tend to think our capacities
only of the human mind but is that true
what are other beings doing with those
brains what are they thinking and
feeling is there a way to know I think
there is a way in I think there are
several ways in we can look at evolution
we can look at their brains and we can
watch what they do first thing to
remember is our brain is inherited the
first neurons came from jellyfish
jellyfish gave rise to the first
chordates the first chordates gave rise
to the first vertebrates the vertebrates
came out of the sea and here we are but
it's still true that a neuron and nerve
cell looks the same in a crayfish a bird
or you what does that say about the
minds of crayfish can we tell anything
about that well it turns out that if you
give a crayfish a lot of little tiny
electric shocks every time it tries to
come out of its burrow it will develop
anxiety if you give the crayfish the
same drug used to treat anxiety disorder
in humans it relaxes and comes out and
explores how do we show how much we care
about crayfish anxiety mostly we boil
them octopuses
use tools as well as do most Apes and
they recognize human faces how do we
celebrate the ape-like intelligence of
this invertebrate mostly boiled if a
grouper chases a fish into a crevice in
the coral it will sometimes go to where
it knows a moray eel is sleeping and it
will signal to the moray follow me and
the moray will understand that signal
the more I may go into the crevice and
get the fish but the fish may bolt and
the grouper may get it this is an
ancient partnership that we have just
recently found out about how do we
celebrate that ancient partnership
mostly fried a pattern is emerging and
it says a lot more about us than it does
about them sea otters use tools and they
take time away from what they're doing
to show their babies what to do which is
called teaching chimpanzees don't teach
killer whales teach and killer whales
share food
when evolution makes something new it
uses the parts it has in stock off the
shelf before it fabricates a new twist
and our brain has come to us through the
enormity of the deep sweep of time if
you look at the human brain compared to
a chimpanzee brain what you see is we
have basically a very big chimpanzee
brain it's a good thing ours is bigger
because we're also really insecure
but oh there's a dolphin a bigger brain
with more convolutions okay maybe you're
saying alright well we see brains but
what does that have to say about minds
well we can see the working of the mind
in the logic of behaviors so these
elephants you can see obviously they are
resting they have found a patch of shade
under the palm trees under which to let
their babies sleep while they doze but
remain vigilant we make perfect sense of
that image just as they make perfect
sense of what they're doing because
under the Ark of the same Sun on the
same planes listening to the howls of
the same dangers they became who they
are and we became who we are we've been
neighbors for a very long time no one
would mistake these elephants as being
relaxed they're obviously very concerned
about something what are they concerned
about it turns out that if you record
the voices of tourists and you play that
recording from a speaker hidden in
bushes elephants will ignore it because
tourists never bother elephants but if
you record the voices of herders who
carry Spears and often hurt elephants in
confrontations at waterholes the
elephants will bunch up and run away
from the hidden speaker not only do
elephants know that there are humans
they know that there are different kinds
of humans and that some are okay and
some are dangerous they have been
watching us for much longer than we have
been watching them they know us better
than we know them we have the same
imperatives take care of our babies find
food try to stay alive
whether we're outfitted for hiking in
the hills of Africa or outfitted for
diving under the sea we are basically
the same we are kin under the skin the
elephant has the same skeleton the
killer whale has the same
skeleton as do we we see helping where
help is needed we see curiosity in the
young we see the bonds of family
connections we recognize affection
courtship is courtship and then we ask
are they conscious when you get general
anesthesia it makes you unconscious
which means you have no sensation of
anything consciousness is simply the
thing that feels like something if you
see if you hear if you feel if you're
aware of anything you are conscious and
they are conscious some people say well
there are certain things that make
humans humans and one of those things is
empathy empathy is the minds ability to
match moods with your companions it's a
very useful thing if your companions
start to move quickly you have to feel
like you need to hurry up roll in a
hurry now the oldest form of empathy is
contagious fear if your companion
suddenly startled and fly away it does
not work very well for you to say geez I
wonder why everybody just left empathy
is old but empathy like everything else
in life comes on a sliding scale and has
its elaboration so there's basic empathy
you feel sad it makes me sad I see you
happy it makes me happy then there is
something that I call sympathy a little
more removed I'm sorry to hear that your
grandmother has just passed away I don't
feel that same grief but I get it I know
what you feel and it concerns me and
then if we're motivated to act on
sympathy I call that compassion far from
being the thing that makes us human
human empathy is far from perfect we
round up empathic creatures we kill them
and we eat them now maybe you say okay
well those are different species
that's just predation and humans are
predators
but we don't treat our own kind too well
either
people who seem to know only one thing
about animal behavior know that you must
never attribute human thoughts and
emotions to other species well I think
that's silly because attributing human
thoughts and emotions to other species
is the best first guess about what
they're doing and how they're feeling
because their brains are basically the
same as ours
they have the same structures the same
hormones that create mood and motivation
in us are in those brains as well it is
not scientific to say that they are
hungry when they're hunting and they're
tired when their tongues are hanging out
and then say when they're playing with
their children and acting joyful and
happy we have no idea if they can
possibly be experiencing anything that
is not scientific it's ok so a reporter
said to me well maybe but how do you
really know that other animals can think
and feel and I started to rifle through
all the hundreds of scientific
references that I put in my book and I
realized that the answer was right in
the room with me when my dog gets off
the rug and comes over to me not to the
couch to me and she rolls over on her
belly on her back and exposes her belly
she has had the thought I would like my
belly rubbed I know that I can go over
to Carl he will understand what I'm
asking I know I can trust him because
we're family he'll get the job done and
it will feel good she has thought and
she has felt and it's really not more
complicated than that
but we see other animals and we say oh
look killer whales
wolves elephants that's not how they see
it
that tall finned male is Elle 41 he's 38
years old
the female right on his left side is
Elle 22 she's 44 they
known each other for decades they know
exactly who they are they know who their
friends are they know who their rivals
are their life follows the arc of a
career they know where they are all the
time this is an elephant named Philo
he's a young male this is him four days
later humans not only can feel grief we
create an awful lot of it we want to
carve their teeth why can't we wait for
them to die
elephants once ranged from the shores of
the Mediterranean Sea all the way down
to the Cape of Good Hope in 1980 there
were vast strongholds of elephant range
in Central and Eastern Africa and now
their range is shattered into little
shards this is the geography of an
animal that we are driving to extinction
a fellow being the most magnificent
creature on land of course we take much
better care of our wildlife in the
United States in Yellowstone National
Park
we killed every single wolf we killed
every single wolf south of the Canadian
border actually but in the park Park
Rangers did that in the 1920s and then
60 years later they had to bring them
back because the elk numbers had gotten
out of control and then people came
people came by the thousands to see the
wolves the most excessively visible
wolves in the world and I went there and
I watched this incredible family of
wolves a pack as a family it has some
breeding adults in the young of several
generations and I watched the most
famous most stable pack in Yellowstone
National Park and then when they
wandered just outside the border two of
their adults were killed including the
mother which we sometimes call the alpha
female the rest of the family
immediately descended into sibling
rivalry sisters kicked out other sisters
that one on the Left tried for days to
join her family they wouldn't let her
because they were jealous of her she was
getting too much attention from two new
males and she was the precocious one
that was too much for them she wound up
wandering outside the park and getting
shot the alpha male wound up being
ejected from his own family as winter
was coming in he lost his territory
his hunting support the members of his
family and his mate we caused so much
pain to them the mystery is why don't
they hurt us more than they do this well
had just finished eating part of a gray
whale with his companions who had killed
that well those people in the boat had
nothing at all to fear this whale is t20
he had just finished tearing a seal into
three pieces with two companions the
seal weighed about as much as the people
in the boat they had nothing to fear
they eat seals why don't they eat us why
can we trust them around our toddlers
why is it that killer whales have
returned to researchers lost in thick
fog and led them miles until the fog
parted and the researchers home was
right there on the shoreline and that's
happened more than one time in the
Bahamas is a woman named Denise Herzing
and she studies spotted dolphins and
they know her she knows them very well
she knows who they all are they know her
they recognize the research boat when
she shows up it's a big happy reunion
except one time she showed up and they
didn't want to come near the boat and
that was really strange they couldn't
figure out what was going on until
somebody came out on deck and announced
that one of the people on board had died
during a nap in his bunk
how could dolphins know that one of the
human hearts had just stopped why would
they care and why would it spook them
these mysterious things just hint
all of the things that are going on in
the minds that are with us on earth that
we almost never think about at all
in an aquarium in South Africa was a
little baby bottlenose dolphin named
dolly she was nursing and one day a
keeper took a cigarette break and he was
looking into the window into their pool
smoking dolly came over and looked at
him went back to her mother nursed for a
minute or two came back to the window
and released a cloud of milk that
enveloped her head like smoke
somehow this baby bottlenose dolphin got
the idea of using milk to represent
smoke when human beings use one thing to
represent another we call that art the
things that make us human are not the
things that we think make us human what
makes us human is that of all these
things that our minds in their minds
have we are the most extreme we are the
most compassionate most violent most
creative and most destructive animal
that has ever been on this planet and we
are all of those things all jumbled up
together but love is not the thing that
makes us human it's not special to us
we're not the only ones who care about
our mates we're not the only ones who
care about our children albatross has
frequently fly six sometimes ten
thousand miles over several weeks to
deliver one meal one big meal to their
chick who is waiting for them they nest
on the most remote islands in the oceans
of the world and this is what it looks
like
passing life from one generation to the
next is the chain of being if that stops
it all goes away if anything is sacred
that is
into that sacred relationship comes our
plastic trash all of these birds have
plastic in them now this is an albatross
six months old
ready to fledge died packed with red
cigarette lighters this is not the
relationship we are supposed to have
with the rest of the world but we who
have named ourselves after our brains
never think about the consequences when
we welcome new human life into the world
we welcome our babies into the company
of other creatures we paint animals on
the walls we don't paint cell phones we
don't paint work cubicles we paint
animals to show them that we are not
alone we have company and every one of
those animals in every painting of
Noah's Ark deemed worthy of salvation is
in mortal danger now and their flood is
us so we started with a question do they
love us we're going to ask another
question are we capable of using what we
have to care enough to simply let them
continue thank you very much
you